---
titulo: "Building Interactive UIs in VS Code with MCP Apps — Marlene Mhangami & Liam Hampton, GitHub"
tema: mcp
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xIwFcnHqp4
data: 2026-06-22
fonte: ai-engineer-summit
importancia: alta
---

# Building Interactive UIs in VS Code with MCP Apps

**Tema:** mcp
**Fonte:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xIwFcnHqp4
**Palestrante:** Marlene Mhangami & Liam Hampton, GitHub
**Evento:** AI Engineer Summit / AI Engineer Conference

## Transcrição (trecho inicial)

Hi everyone. Uh we'll introduce ourselves. My name is Madelaine and I'm a senior developer advocate at Microsoft and GitHub. >> And likewise, I'm Liam Hampton and I also am working at Microsoft and GitHub on the developer tools advocacy team for Visual Studio Code and GitHub Copilot. >> Yes. I do similar things but probably Liam is more in the VS Code side as well. Um so just to get started, a bit of an agenda of what we're going to cover today in this session. We're going to talk about what MCP is and then we're going to talk about why we need MCP apps and what they are. And then Liam is goin

## Transcrição completa

Hi everyone. Uh we'll introduce ourselves. My name is Madelaine and I'm a senior developer advocate at Microsoft and GitHub. >> And likewise, I'm Liam Hampton and I also am working at Microsoft and GitHub on the developer tools advocacy team for Visual Studio Code and GitHub Copilot. >> Yes. I do similar things but probably Liam is more in the VS Code side as well. Um so just to get started, a bit of an agenda of what we're going to cover today in this session. We're going to talk about what MCP is and then we're going to talk about why we need MCP apps and what they are. And then Liam is going to do some live demos of how to use MCP apps, how to build them and use them in VS Code. So just to get started, maybe I can ask uh the question of how many of us know what MCP is. Okay, that's a good that's a good amount of the room. Okay, good. That means that we are up to date. I will do a quick then summary uh to talk about what it is but MCP, of course, is an open protocol that standardizes how applications provide context to LLMs. So it was created by Anthropic. Uh it is open. Uh it's an open protocol so hope thankfully the community can use it and it allows us to access context or LLMs to access context like tools or prompts or resources um in different ways. So just to get uh a bit of an overview of which parts of MCP we will be looking at with MCP tools. The first thing is that we have MCP hosts. And hosts are prob are programs like VS Code that want to access data from your MCP servers. So, you can have different types of hosts, um and they will come with different clients as well. So, the second thing is that we have clients and these are sometimes going to be the same as the host, but not all of the time. And these will maintain the one-to-one connection with the servers. So, in our case in VS Code, we usually encourage people to use the client GitHub Copilot. And that's what we'll be looking at today. And then the final thing would be the servers. And with servers, these are going to actually lightweight programs that expose specific capabilities through MCP to provide that context. And you can build your own servers or you can use any of the many servers that are available out there. So, in VS Code, if you actually go to the extensions tab and you type in at MCP, you'll get of different servers that are available. We definitely encourage you to use the server list that is in VS Code just because sometimes you can have some security issues if you just go on the internet and pick a random server, it can have malicious stuff in it. So, we recommend using um what's there in in VS Code or or GitHub. So, when MCP was first released, one of the downsides was that you would pretty much only have it return text. So, if someone was going to ask a question like in this case, I would ask a question asking it to draw an image, a diagram explaining what MCP is. And so, a lot of the times in the early days of MCP or in general of LLMs, you can go to a GitHub repository and most of the readmes have ASCII art or they have a lot of emojis. I feel like we were overcompensating with emojis because we actually couldn't generate diagrams or interesting rich text with MCPs or the tools that we had available to us. So, a good question to ask is how can we create rich UI experiences in chat? So, this is exactly where MCP apps comes into play. So, MCP apps let server tools return rich interactive components that render directly in the chat. So, you're able to have the server actually return these nice UI elements so that you can be able to interact with them directly in the chat and also just improves the general visual element of things as well. So, I showed earlier that ASCII art example where it was text returned. I asked the same question using the Excalidraw MCP server, which now uses an MCP app to generate a diagram that explains MCP. And you can see that it generates This is a just a screenshot of of what it looks like. But there, another really cool thing is that you can actually interact with that diagram. You can go ahead and move it around um even update the text and so on because this is a live element that's actually available in the chat. So, how do How do you MCP apps actually work? A good example is that maybe we have a user. We start by the user asking a question. So, they'll send a prompt. Maybe they'll say, "Show me analytics." And the agent with the LLM is going to decide which tools to call using the MCP server. It'll connect and then decide on a tool. And then the server is going to return the tool results with a UI a resource reference. So, MCP has MCP resources, and this reference will point to an HTML element that is stored that the server has generated. Then the host, so not the client, it wouldn't be GitHub Copilot, but the host, which is VS Code, is going to fetch the HTML from that UI reference that was referenced from the server, and then the host is going to render the app inside a sandboxed iframe. So, the user at that point is able to interact with the iframe in the host, and there's really a nice separation there between the two. And then the app can call back to the server back and forth so that you have this live interaction experience. And then the use the server can return fresh data, and the app will update as well. Some different use cases for MCP apps. One, for example, is data exploration. You can think of if you are Imagine if we were just typing into a chat all the time, and we wanted to understand more about a data set. It'd be difficult to interact with the database. It'd be difficult to always type in and ask new questions. Oh, you know, maybe you found out information about a trend in with the bar chart, and then you wanted to find more information about um maybe some specific numbers in another chart, and actually typing in that information is going to be tiring for the user when they can just click different buttons in the UI in that way. Another thing is e-commerce. I think this is a really great example where a user maybe in one case would want to be able to actually buy something in the chat UI. So, maybe not as much in VS Code, but in other chat UIs like in OpenAI or something like that, the user should be able to in the chat actually go ahead and buy and go through the entire checkout experiences in the chat instead of just typing out in the past what would happen is maybe you type you can ask your client, can I buy something online? And then it would just return links to you and then you'd have to navigate over to the browser. What we want is to keep the user inside the chat and then have them interact and have that experience there. Who is currently building MCP apps? I think this is a good question to ask. Spotify is not Spotify, Shopify. Shopify is an example of a company that's currently building with MCP apps. And I listened to a really good talk about how they're also focusing on keeping the brand experience of a company the same as if you were on the company's website. If the user is in the chat, the elements that are rendered should be the same and it should give the same brand feel. So, they're really working on the UI elements that are returned so that the user can literally go through the full checkout experience like I was mentioning to be able to actually buy in the chat. Another group that are using MCP apps like I mentioned before is Excalidraw. That is really popular right now for maybe generating architecture diagrams or having interactive diagrams. If you go go to Cloud Code for example, they have really nice MCP apps that use Excalidraw to just generate an image visualizing things. Figma is another company that's using MCP apps. I couldn't find a picture of a nice Figma MCP app rendered, but generally speaking they have components that you can generate on the fly with MCP apps. So, I think that's all I'm going to cover and now Liam is going to go ahead and do our live demo. >> Yeah, nice one. Tha
